# Introduction #

Managing risk is fundamental to the conservation of an endangered species. When 
an endangered species exists as a metapopulation, we can manage risk at two 
levels: at the population level or at the metapopulation level. Typically we 
treat sources of risk at the metapopulation level as external and 
uncontrollable and so we manage risk by altering fishing or hunting on a 
population level as well as improving the connectivity of populations.

The management of financial portfolios provides another way of considering 
risk. Economists consider the risk and performance of a financial portfolio as 
a function of the weighting of individual assets that make up the portfolio. 
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) proposes that there is a set of portfolios that 
maximizes expected return for a level of expected risk or minimizes expected 
risk for a level of expected return [@Markowitz1952; @Markowitz1959]. This 
optimal set contains portfolios that range along a continuum of risk-tolerance; 
economists refer to this set as the efficient frontier.

Portfolios provide another way of managing risk - explain mean-variance 
optimization and how this translates to ecology
[@Figge2004]
[@Hoekstra2012] 
[@Ando2011,@Ando2012] 
[@Markowitz1952,@Markowitz1959]

We use salmon as an example, describe the components of the example, provide 
references on metapopulation existence
[@Schindler2010]

Research questions, and briefly our approach - Monte Carlo simulation 
modelling, as simple a model as possible while retaining important realistic 
aspects of salmon metapopulations

Here, we ask how a portfolio approach to managing risk can inform the spatial 
conservation of metapopulations in a changing world. To answer this, we develop 
a salmon metapopulation simulation in which population-specific productivity is 
driven by spatially-distributed environmental tolerance and patterns of short- 
and long-term environmental change. We then implement different conservation 
"rules of thumb" that control the population-specific carrying capacities and 
evaluate the salmon portfolios along risk and return axes, similarly to how 
financial portfolios are assessed. We show... (briefly)
