* How do we want to run the simulation?
 * Andy's metapopulation model?
 * Add in density dependence - Pestes et al. 2008?
 * Will we capture the important elements for this test? How will we know?

* Probabilistic management objective?

* Make a direct comparison to not optimizing as a portfolio?

* Something that can be done at UW?

* How do we want to try and adjust the investment ratio?
 * carrying capacity adjustment? and how?
 * habitat restoration?
 * do we want to get into supplementation and affecting harvest rates?
 * is it realistic that these adjustments could be made within a reasonable time and have their intended effect?

* How can we capture the slop of how the populations respond to changed carrying capacity?

* Low, medium, and high growth portfolios or just lowest risk?

* Background with SLAM?

* What data are available to work with?

* What assumptions are violated so that we can’t calculate optimal portfolios algebraically?

* Would there also be harvesting?

* What's this bit about choosing random sets of K_i (Figure 2)? Why can't we use standard mean-variance optimization techniques? The distribution of log differences (rate of change) isn't that different from economics and is relatively normal.

* Additional chapter options? Black swan, portfolio risk metrics, financial risk metrics for ecology, is nature the original portfolio manager?

* Diverging portfolio effects paper: increasingly convinced (largely by Loreau) that neither is a useful way of looking at it.

* There are 4 main sources of variability: environmental forcing, demographic, community (density dependence), and measurement. Only the diversity of responses to environmental forcing is relevant to the portfolio effect. The others vary and obscure the underlying effect.


