# Possible titles
Portfolio management of salmon metapopulations

# Paragraph for the candidacy
When it comes to managing species such as salmon that exist as metapopulations, we can manage risk on an individual population level or we can manage risk for the system as a whole, explicitly accounting for asynchrony in population responses to environmental conditions. Portfolio optimization provides a framework to carry out the latter. Portfolio optimization of ecological resources has been suggested conceptually (XX, XX, XX) and is a logical extension of the current focus on the portfolio *effect* (If ecological systems act as portfolios then why not manage them as portfolios?). But, will this approach work? Would the addition of portfolio management provide better outcomes than traditional management approaches alone? What are the options for implementing a portfolio optimization approach and how do these options affect the success of the approach? In chapter X, and in collaboration with Jonathan Moore, Michelle McClure, XX, (as well as my advisors) I plan to investigate the viability of a portfolio optimization approach to managing salmonid populations. I propose to build the simulation on the simple salmonid metapopulation model of \citet{Cooper:1999:DIM} and add a spawner-recruit density-dependence element (e.g., using the approach of Pestes et al. 2008) based on data from a real-world salmonid metapopulation of conservation concern (e.g., Snake river XX). The simulation will propagate uncertainty in the fitted spawner-recruit relationships from the Bayesian posteriors and uncertainty in hypothesized parameter distributions via Monte Carlo sampling. I will investigate various management objectives such as minimizing the probability of extinction, minimizing the probability of fishery closure, maximizing fishing revenue, or perhaps a hierarchical management objective, such as in \citet{Pestes:2008:BDA}, where probabilistic recovery and extinction targets must be met and thereafter fishing revenue is maximized. I will compare the expected distribution of outcomes across portfolio optimization options (e.g., low-risk-low-return, medium-risk-medium-return, high-risk-high-return) combined with a simplistic harvesting rule-based approach (e.g. fish at $F_{MSY}$ if $B > 0.5B_{MSY}$) as well as the simplistic harvesting management approach on its own. At regular intervals (e.g., every 10 years), the simulated time series would be evaluated using a mean-variance portfolio optimization approach and the weights on the ``assets'' adjusted towards the optimal portfolio (Figure~X). This adjustment could be accomplished by modifying carrying capacity by habitat restoration or destruction or by changes in harvesting. I could investigate the implications of introducing constraints on the investment adjustment such as requiring a certain level of investment in all assets (i.e., not allowing deliberate extinctions). I plan to begin coding this simulation in the summer of 2012.
% Include a figure demonstrating the efficient frontier and a bunch of time series that go into it as well as the realized portfolio and where the efficient portfolio would be. Also show a monte carlo posterior of hypothesized differences in catches (or something else like extinct fraction).


# Summary
- we can manage risk on a population by population level or we can measure it for a system as a whole taking into account the asynchrony between populations
- portfolio optimization provides a framework around which to base the latter approach
- This has been suggested conceptually (e.g., XX, XX, XX) and I see this as a logical extension of the current focus on the "portfolio effect" (If they act like portfolios then why not manage them as portfolios?).
- BUT, Would this really work? Would it provide better management outcomes than traditional management? What are the options for implementing this and do these affect the success of the approach?
- This will entail developing a salmonid metapopulation time-series simulation model that incorporates a spawner-recruit relationship gleaned from data formed to somewhat resemble a known real-world system (e.g., Snake River...).
- Management objective... (go through the steps of decision analysis and document in a sentence or two each.)
- I plan to begin coding this simulation summer 2012.

# Management objectives (measured outcome)
* Could use a probabilistic management objective modelled after Pestes et al. (2008). Something like: probability of recovery within 10 years for all populations must be above 90%, probability of extinction within 50 years for all populations must be below 10%, if both of those are true then maximize fishing revenue. 
* Other options are to look at the distribution of some single metric: probability of extinction, mean growth rate, fishing revenue or volume of catch, stability of fishing revenue or catch. Overlay the distributions of whatever the measured outcome is for various management options.

# Management strategies
Use a simple underlying management strategy. Something like Pestes et al. (2008) but likely just picking a single set of thresholds that seem reasonable. Something like: harvest at FMSY if biomass is above 0.5BMSY and if abundance falls below 0.5BMSY then stop all harvesting.

We want to compare the distribution of outcomes between cases with and without the portfolio optimization strategy.

Management options might include: 
* low-risk-low-return
* medium-risk-medium-return
* high-risk-high-return
* no portfolio optimization

Also, various constraints on the optimization process such as:
* no deliberate extinctions: every stock must be invested in X 
* deliberate extinctions are fine
* perhaps we'll stick with the simple scenario of only changing adjusting carrying capacity but we could also test the addition of adjusting the harvesting rate to move towards the efficient portfolio

# Simulation approach
* Probably start with the salmonid metapopulation time-series model in Cooper and Mangel (1999).
* Add in density dependence that incorporates a spawner-recruit relationship. Perhaps based on Pestes et al. (2008) or XX (Les Ecol talk).
* Another possibility is to use the non-neutral synchrony model from Loreau and de Mazancourt (2008) and Loreau (2010) with an addition of basic metapopulation structure.

# Questions:
Overarching question: Is portfolio management a viable tool for the management of salmon metapopulations? 
Specific testable questions:
1. Does adding portfolio optimization improve various metrics of management success (extinction probability, fishing revenue, total biomass, stability of catches, frequency of closure, ...) over the null case of using only harvesting thresholds?
2. Are there conditions when portfolio optimization works better than others?
3. What are the impacts of different asset adjustment approaches on the success of portfolio optimization?

# Hypotheses:
* Mean-variance optimization may tend to under-prioritize those populations that are doing badly (i.e., have a low growth rate) but theoretically it should (1) increase the performance of the overall portfolio (e.g., by promoting diversity of responses to environmental forcing) and (2) the metapopulation structure will enable a rescue effect. Will these factors combine to reduce extinction risk and increase fishing revenue?


# Issues
* How coarse should the adjustments be? We want to be realistic. 
* Could make it really coarse to start with: if a stock should be invested in more than it currently is then add X amount of carrying capacity; if stock should be invested in less than it currently is then remove X amount of carrying capacity unless it's below 0.5BMSY.
* Could also be perfectly precise for a best-case scenario: determine exactly how much carrying capacity should be added or removed to achieve that change.
* What are the weights? In the financial world they are the amount invested. Here they could be carrying capacity. They could be amount fished. They could be some sort of time investment.

# References
Cooper, A. B. and Mangel, M. (1999). The dangers of ignoring metapopulation structure for the conservation of salmonids. 97(2):213–226.

Pestes, L. R., Peterman, R. M., Bradford, M. J., and Wood, C. C. (2008). Bayesian decision analysis for evaluating management options to promote recovery of a depleted salmon population. Cons. Biol. 22(2):351–361.