from: Viable Salmonid Populations and the Recovery of Evolutionarily Significant Units

# ESU Viability Guidelines
1. ESUs should contain multiple populations . If an ESU is made up of multiple populations, it is less likely that a single catastrophic event will cause it to become extinct. Also, ESUs may function as “metapopulations” over the long term and the existence of multiple populations would be necessary for the operation of sustainable population-level extinction/recolonization processes. In addition, multiple populations within an ESU increase the likelihood that a diversity of phenotypic and genotypic characteristics will be maintained, thus allowing natural evolutionary processes to operate and increasing the ESU’s viability in the long term. Obviously, this guideline does not apply to ESUs that appear to contain a single population (e.g., Lake Ozette sockeye). In ESUs containing a single population Guideline 6 becomes increasingly important.

2. Some populations in an ESU should be geographically widespread. Spatially correlated environmental catastrophes are less likely to drive a widespread ESU to extinction. This guideline also directly relates to the ESA mandate of protecting a species in a “significant portion of (its) range.”

3. Some populations should be geographically close to each other. On long temporal scales, ESUs may function as “metapopulations” and having populations geographically close to one another facilitates connectivity among existing populations. Thus, a viable ESU requires both widespread (Guideline 2) AND spatially close populations.

4. Populations should not all share common catastrophic risks . An ESU containing populations that do not share common catastrophic risks is less likely to be driven to extinction by correlated environmental catastrophes. Maintaining geographically widespread populations is one way to reduce risk associated with correlated catastrophes (Guideline 2), but spatial proximity is not the only reason why two populations could experience a correlated catastrophic risk.

5. Populations that display diverse life-histories and phenotypes should be maintained. When an ESU’s populations have a fair degree of life-history diversity (or other phenotypic diversity), the ESU is less likely to go extinct as a result of correlated environmental catastrophes or changes in environmental conditions that occur too rapidly for an evolutionary response. In addition, assuming phenotypic diversity is caused at least in part by genetic diversity, maintaining diversity allows natural evolutionary processes to operate within an ESU.

6. Some populations should exceed VSP guidelines. Larger and more productive (“resilient”) populations may be able to recover from a catastrophic event that would cause the extinction of a smaller population. An ESU that contains some populations in excess of VSP threshold criteria for abundance and population growth rate is less likely to go extinct in response to a single catastrophic event that affects all populations. It is important to note that the abundance guidelines do not take catastrophes into account. This guideline is particularly relevant if an ESU consists of a single population.

7. Evaluations of ESU status should take into account uncertainty about ESU-level processes. Our understanding of ESU-level spatial and temporal process is very limited. ESUs are believed to have been historically self-sustaining and the historical number and distribution of populations serves as a useful “default” goal in maintaining viable ESUs.

